README.md, before:

# Astaroth - A Multi-GPU Library for Generic Stencil Computations {#mainpage}

[Specification](doc/Astaroth_API_specification_and_user_manual/API_specification_and_user_manual.md) | [Contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md) | [Licence](LICENCE.md) | [Repository](https://bitbucket.org/jpekkila/astaroth) | [Issue Tracker](https://bitbucket.org/jpekkila/astaroth/issues?status=new&status=open) | [Wiki](https://bitbucket.org/jpekkila/astaroth/wiki/Home)

Astaroth is a multi-GPU library for three-dimensional stencil computations. It is designed especially for performing high-order stencil
computations in structured grids, where several coupled fields are updated each time step. Astaroth consists of a multi-GPU and single-GPU
APIs and provides a domain-specific language for translating high-level descriptions of stencil computations into efficient GPU code. This
makes Astaroth especially suitable for multiphysics simulations.

Astaroth is licenced under the terms of the GNU General Public Licence, version 3, or later
(see [LICENCE.txt](LICENCE.md)). For contributing guidelines,
see [Contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md).


## System Requirements
* An NVIDIA GPU with support for compute capability 3.0 or higher (Kepler architecture or newer)

## Dependencies
Relative recent versions of

`gcc cmake cuda flex bison`.

## Building

In the base directory, run

1. `mkdir build`
2. `cd build`
3. `cmake ..`
4. `make -j`

> **Optional:** Documentation can be generated by running `doxygen` in the base directory. Generated documentation can be found in `doc/doxygen`.

> **Tip:**  The library is configured by passing [options](#markdown-header-cmake-options) to CMake with `-D[option]=[ON|OFF]`. For example, double precision can be enabled by calling `cmake -DBUILD_DOUBLE_PRECISION=ON ..`. See [CMakeLists.txt](https://bitbucket.org/jpekkila/astaroth/src/master/CMakeLists.txt) for an up-to-date list of options.

> **Note:** CMake will inform you if there are missing dependencies.

## CMake Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE | Selects the build type. Possible values: Debug, Release, RelWithDebInfo, MinSizeRel. See (CMake documentation)[https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/variable/CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE.html] for more details. | Release |
| CUDA_ARCHITECTURES | Selects CUDA architecture support. Multiple architectures delimited by `;`. See (CMake documentation)[https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/prop_tgt/CUDA_ARCHITECTURES.html] for more details. | "60;70" |
| DOUBLE_PRECISION | Generates double precision code. | OFF |
| BUILD_SAMPLES | Builds projects in samples subdirectory. | ON |
| MPI_ENABLED | Enables acGrid functions for carrying out computations with MPI. | OFF |
| USE_CUDA_AWARE_MPI | Uses GPUDirect RDMA for direct GPU-GPU communication instead of routing communication through host memory | ON | 
| MULTIGPU_ENABLED | Enables Astaroth to use multiple GPUs on a single node. Uses peer-to-peer communication instead of MPI. Affects Legacy & Node layers only. | ON |
| DSL_MODULE_DIR | Defines the directory to be scanned when looking for DSL files. | `acc/mhd_solver` |
| PROGRAM_MODULE_DIR | Can be used to declare additional host-side program modules (also known as Thrones) | empty |
| VERBOSE | Enables various non-critical warning and status messages. | OFF |
| BUILD_UTILS | "Builds the utility library. Depends on `DSL_MODULE_DIR=acc/mhd_solver`". | ON |


## Standalone Module


```Bash
Usage: ./ac_run [options]
	     --help | -h: Prints this help.
	     --test | -t: Runs autotests.
	--benchmark | -b: Runs benchmarks.
	 --simulate | -s: Runs the simulation.
	   --render | -r: Runs the real-time renderer.
	   --config | -c: Uses the config file given after this flag instead of the default.
```

See `analysis/python/` directory of existing data visualization and analysis scripts.

## Interface

* `astaroth/include/astaroth.h`: Astaroth main header. Contains the interface for accessing single- and multi-GPU layers.
* `astaroth/include/astaroth_utils.h`: Utility library header. Provides functions for performing common tasks on host, such as allocating and verifying meshes.
* `<build directory>/astaroth.f90`: Fortran interface to Astaroth. Generated when building the library.

## FAQ

Can I use the code even if I don't make my changes public?

> [GPL](LICENCE.md) requires only that if you release a binary based on Astaroth to the public, then you should also release the source code for it. In private you can do whatever you want (secret forks, secret collaborations, etc). **Astaroth Code source files (.ac, .h) do not belong to the library and therefore are not licenced under GPL.** The user who created the files holds copyright over them and can choose to distribute them under any licence.

How do I compile with MPI support?

> Ensure that your MPI implementation has been built with CUDA support and invoke CMake with `cmake -DMPI_ENABLED=ON -DBUILD_SAMPLES=ON ..`. Otherwise the build steps are the same. Assign exactly one process per GPU and run with, for example, `srun --gres=gpu:v100:<ngpus per node> --ntasks-per-socket=<ngpus per node / NICs per node> -n <total number of gpus> -N <number of nodes> ./mpitest` or for `mpirun` the command `mpirun -np <ngpus per node>  ./mpitest` works (at least on a GPU node).

I have issues with MPI

> If your MPI has been setup incorrectly or does not support CUDA-aware communication, you can try building Astaroth without RDMA support with `cmake -DUSE_CUDA_AWARE_MPI=OFF ..`. Note that without CUDA-aware support, communication is routed through CPU memory which gives notably worse performance than communicating directly between GPUs.

How do I contribute?

> See [Contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md).

Commit message:

Added Slurm instructions to the README.

README.md, after:

# Astaroth - A Multi-GPU Library for Generic Stencil Computations {#mainpage}

[Specification](doc/Astaroth_API_specification_and_user_manual/API_specification_and_user_manual.md) | [Contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md) | [Licence](LICENCE.md) | [Repository](https://bitbucket.org/jpekkila/astaroth) | [Issue Tracker](https://bitbucket.org/jpekkila/astaroth/issues?status=new&status=open) | [Wiki](https://bitbucket.org/jpekkila/astaroth/wiki/Home)

Astaroth is a multi-GPU library for three-dimensional stencil computations. It is designed especially for performing high-order stencil
computations in structured grids, where several coupled fields are updated each time step. Astaroth consists of a multi-GPU and single-GPU
APIs and provides a domain-specific language for translating high-level descriptions of stencil computations into efficient GPU code. This
makes Astaroth especially suitable for multiphysics simulations.

Astaroth is licenced under the terms of the GNU General Public Licence, version 3, or later
(see [LICENCE.txt](LICENCE.md)). For contributing guidelines,
see [Contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md).


## System Requirements
* An NVIDIA GPU with support for compute capability 3.0 or higher (Kepler architecture or newer)

## Dependencies
Relative recent versions of

`gcc cmake cuda flex bison`.

## Building

In the base directory, run

1. `mkdir build`
2. `cd build`
3. `cmake ..`
4. `make -j`

> **Optional:** Documentation can be generated by running `doxygen` in the base directory. Generated documentation can be found in `doc/doxygen`.

> **Tip:**  The library is configured by passing [options](#markdown-header-cmake-options) to CMake with `-D[option]=[ON|OFF]`. For example, double precision can be enabled by calling `cmake -DBUILD_DOUBLE_PRECISION=ON ..`. See [CMakeLists.txt](https://bitbucket.org/jpekkila/astaroth/src/master/CMakeLists.txt) for an up-to-date list of options.

> **Note:** CMake will inform you if there are missing dependencies.

## Running on clusters (Slurm)

1. Load the modules required for building: `module load gcc/8.3.0 cuda/10.1.168 cmake openmpi/4.0.3-cuda`
1. Build with MPI support: `cmake -DMPI_ENABLED=ON ..` (see 'Building' above)
1. Run the code interactively or with a batch job, f.ex. `srun --account=<project number> --gres=gpu:v100:4 --mem=24000 -t 00:14:59 -p gputest --ntasks-per-socket=2 -n 4 -N 1 <executable here, f.ex ./mpitest or ./benchmark 256 256 256 or ./ac_run -t>`

> **Note:** Assign one task per GPU when using MPI.

> **Tip:** For more information on running the code on Puhti, see [Puhti docs](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/overview/).

## CMake Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE | Selects the build type. Possible values: Debug, Release, RelWithDebInfo, MinSizeRel. See (CMake documentation)[https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/variable/CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE.html] for more details. | Release |
| CUDA_ARCHITECTURES | Selects CUDA architecture support. Multiple architectures delimited by `;`. See (CMake documentation)[https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/prop_tgt/CUDA_ARCHITECTURES.html] for more details. | "60;70" |
| DOUBLE_PRECISION | Generates double precision code. | OFF |
| BUILD_SAMPLES | Builds projects in samples subdirectory. | ON |
| MPI_ENABLED | Enables acGrid functions for carrying out computations with MPI. | OFF |
| USE_CUDA_AWARE_MPI | Uses GPUDirect RDMA for direct GPU-GPU communication instead of routing communication through host memory | ON | 
| MULTIGPU_ENABLED | Enables Astaroth to use multiple GPUs on a single node. Uses peer-to-peer communication instead of MPI. Affects Legacy & Node layers only. | ON |
| DSL_MODULE_DIR | Defines the directory to be scanned when looking for DSL files. | `acc/mhd_solver` |
| PROGRAM_MODULE_DIR | Can be used to declare additional host-side program modules (also known as Thrones) | empty |
| VERBOSE | Enables various non-critical warning and status messages. | OFF |
| BUILD_UTILS | "Builds the utility library. Depends on `DSL_MODULE_DIR=acc/mhd_solver`". | ON |


## Standalone Module


```Bash
Usage: ./ac_run [options]
	     --help | -h: Prints this help.
	     --test | -t: Runs autotests.
	--benchmark | -b: Runs benchmarks.
	 --simulate | -s: Runs the simulation.
	   --render | -r: Runs the real-time renderer.
	   --config | -c: Uses the config file given after this flag instead of the default.
```

See `analysis/python/` directory of existing data visualization and analysis scripts.

## Interface

* `astaroth/include/astaroth.h`: Astaroth main header. Contains the interface for accessing single- and multi-GPU layers.
* `astaroth/include/astaroth_utils.h`: Utility library header. Provides functions for performing common tasks on host, such as allocating and verifying meshes.
* `<build directory>/astaroth.f90`: Fortran interface to Astaroth. Generated when building the library.

## FAQ

Can I use the code even if I don't make my changes public?

> [GPL](LICENCE.md) requires only that if you release a binary based on Astaroth to the public, then you should also release the source code for it. In private you can do whatever you want (secret forks, secret collaborations, etc). **Astaroth Code source files (.ac, .h) do not belong to the library and therefore are not licenced under GPL.** The user who created the files holds copyright over them and can choose to distribute them under any licence.

How do I compile with MPI support?

> Ensure that your MPI implementation has been built with CUDA support and invoke CMake with `cmake -DMPI_ENABLED=ON -DBUILD_SAMPLES=ON ..`. Otherwise the build steps are the same. Assign exactly one process per GPU and run with, for example, `srun --gres=gpu:v100:<ngpus per node> --ntasks-per-socket=<ngpus per node / NICs per node> -n <total number of gpus> -N <number of nodes> ./mpitest` or for `mpirun` the command `mpirun -np <ngpus per node>  ./mpitest` works (at least on a GPU node).

I have issues with MPI

> If your MPI has been setup incorrectly or does not support CUDA-aware communication, you can try building Astaroth without RDMA support with `cmake -DUSE_CUDA_AWARE_MPI=OFF ..`. Note that without CUDA-aware support, communication is routed through CPU memory which gives notably worse performance than communicating directly between GPUs.

How do I contribute?

> See [Contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md).
